---
title: 'Shorthands'
description: 'Character class shorthands'
sidebar:
  order: 6
---

There are abbreviations, called _shorthands_, for often needed character sets:

- `[digit]` or `[d]` matches a **decimal number**. It is similar to `['0'-'9']`#po,
  except that it is Unicode aware.

- `[word]` or `[w]` matches a **word character**, i.e. a letter, digit or underscore. It's similar
  to `['0'-'9' 'a'-'z' 'A'-'Z' '_']`#po, except that it is Unicode aware. It matches all
  codepoints in the _Alphabetic, Mark, Decimal_Number, Connector_Punctuation,_ and _Join_Control_
  Unicode categories.

- `[space]` or `[s]` matches **whitespace**. It is equivalent to the _White_Space_ category.

- `[horiz_space]` or `[h]` matches **horizontal whitespace**, e.g. tabs und spaces.

- `[vert_space]` or `[v]` matches **vertical whitespace**, e.g. line breaks.

These can be combined as well:

```pomsky
[d s '.']   # match digits, spaces, and dots
```

Note that `word`, `digit` and `space` only match ASCII characters, if the regex engine isn't
configured to be Unicode-aware. How to enable Unicode support is
[described here](/docs/get-started/enable-unicode).

## What if I don't need Unicode?

You don't have to use Unicode-aware character sets such as `[digit]`#po if you
know that the input is only ASCII. Unicode-aware matching can be considerably slower. For example,
the `[word]`#po character class includes more than 100,000 code points, so
matching a `[ascii_word]`#po (which includes only 63 code points) is faster.

Pomsky supports a number of ASCII-only shorthands:

| Character class     | Equivalent                             |
| ------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `[ascii]`#po        | `[U+00-U+7F]`#po                       |
| `[ascii_alpha]`#po  | `['a'-'z' 'A'-'Z']`#po                 |
| `[ascii_alnum]`#po  | `['0'-'9' 'a'-'z' 'A'-'Z']`#po         |
| `[ascii_blank]`#po  | `[' ' U+09],`#po                       |
| `[ascii_cntrl]`#po  | `[U+00-U+1F U+7F]`#po                  |
| `[ascii_digit]`#po  | `['0'-'9']`#po                         |
| `[ascii_graph]`#po  | `['!'-'~']`#po                         |
| `[ascii_lower]`#po  | `['a'-'z']`#po                         |
| `[ascii_print]`#po  | `[' '-'~']`#po                         |
| `[ascii_punct]`#po  | `['!'-'/' ':'-'@' '['-'`' '{'-'~']`#po |
| `[ascii_space]`#po  | `[' ' U+09-U+0D]`#po                   |
| `[ascii_upper]`#po  | `['A'-'Z']`#po                         |
| `[ascii_word]`#po   | `['0'-'9' 'a'-'z' 'A'-'Z' '_']`#po     |
| `[ascii_xdigit]`#po | `['0'-'9' 'a'-'f' 'A'-'F']`#po         |

Using them can improve performance, but be careful when you use them. If you aren't sure if the
input will ever contain non-ASCII characters, it's better to err on the side of correctness, and
use Unicode-aware character classes.

## Non-printable characters

Characters that can't be printed should be replaced with their hexadecimal Unicode code point. For
example, you may write `U+FEFF`#po to match the
[Zero Width No-Break Space](https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/U+FEFF).

There are also 6 non-printable characters with a name:

- `[n]`#po matches the `\n` line feed.
- `[r]`#po matches the `\r` carriage return.
- `[f]`#po matches the `\f` form feed.
- `[a]`#po matches the "alert" or "bell" control character.
- `[e]`#po matches the "escape" control character.

Other characters have to be written in their hexadecimal form:

```pomsky
[U+10-U+30 U+FEFF]
```

Note that you don't need to write leading zeroes, i.e. `U+0`#po is just as ok as
`U+0000`#po. However, it is conventional to write ASCII characters with two digits and
non-ASCII characters with 4, 5 or 6 digits depending on their length.
